

    Creado por Māris B., actualizado por última vez por Matīss O. el ene 13, 2025 15 min de lectura

    Common Actions and Associated properties
        Stats
        Other Useful Commands
    Matchers
        Stateless Properties
        Stateful Properties

Common Actions and Associated properties
action (action name; Default: accept)	Action to take if a packet is matched by the rule:

    accept - accept the packet. A packet is not passed to the next firewall rule.
    add-dst-to-address-list - add destination address to address list specified by address-list parameter
    add-src-to-address-list - add source address to address list specified by address-list parameter
    jump - jump to the user-defined chain specified by the value of jump-target parameter
    log - add a message to the system log containing the following data: in-interface, out-interface, src-mac, protocol, src-ip:port->dst-ip:port and length of the packet. After a packet is matched it is passed to the next rule in the list, similar as passthrough
    passthrough - if a packet is matched by the rule, increase counter and go to next rule (useful for statistics)
    return - passes control back to the chain from where the jump took place

address-list (name; Default: )	

Name of the address list to be used. Applicable if action is add-dst- to-address-list or add-src-to-address-list
address-list-timeout (none-dynamic | none-static | time; Default: none-dynamic)	Time interval after which the address will be removed from the address list specified by address-list parameter. Used in conjunction with add-dst-to-address-list or add-src-to-address-list actions

    Value of none-dynamic (00:00:00) will leave the address in the address list till reboot
    Value of none-static will leave the address in the address list forever and will be included in the configuration export/backup

jump-target (name; Default: )	Name of the target chain to jump to. Applicable only if action=jump
log (yes | no; Default: no)	Add a message to the system log containing the following data: in-interface, out-interface, src-mac, protocol, src-ip:port->dst-ip:port, and length of the packet. Allows to log packets even if action is not "log", useful for debugging firewall.
log-prefix (string; Default: )	Adds specified text at the beginning of every log message. Applicable if action=log or log=yes configured.
Stats

To view matching statistics by firewall rules, run /ip firewall filter print stats command or /ipv6 firewall filter print stats for IPv6 firewall.


bytes (integer)	The total amount of bytes matched by the rule
packets (integer)	The total amount of packets matched by the rule
[admin@MikroTik] > ip firewall filter print stats 
Flags: X - disabled, I - invalid, D - dynamic 
 #    CHAIN                                                                                                                 ACTION                            BYTES         PACKETS
 0  D ;;; special dummy rule to show fasttrack counters
      forward                                                                                                               passthrough              50 507 925 242      50 048 246
 1    ;;; defconf: drop invalid
      forward                                                                                                               drop                            432 270           9 719
 2    ;;; defconf: drop invalid
      input                                                                                                                 drop                            125 943           2 434
 3    input                                                                                                                 accept                   20 090 211 549      20 009 864
 4    ;;; defconf: accept ICMP
      input                                                                                                                 accept                          634 926           7 648
 5    ;;; defconf: drop all not coming from LAN
      input                                                                                                                 drop                          4 288 079          83 428
 6    ;;; defconf: accept in ipsec policy
      forward                                                                                                               accept                                0               0
7    ;;; defconf: accept out ipsec policy
      forward                                                                                                               accept                                0               0
8    ;;; defconf: fasttrack
      forward                                                                                                               fasttrack-connection     28 505 528 775      31 504 682
9    ;;; defconf: accept established,related, untracked
      forward                                                                                                               accept                   28 505 528 775      31 504 682
10    ;;; defconf: drop all from WAN not DSTNATed
      forward                                                                                                               drop                                  0               0


Statistics parameters can be reset by following commands:
reset-counters (id)	

Reset statistics counters for specific firewall rule or list of rules.
reset-counters-all	

Reset statistics counters for all firewall rules in the table.
Other Useful Commands

By default print is equivalent to print static and shows only static rules.

To print also dynamic rules use print all.

Or to print only dynamic rules use print dynamic.
Matchers

Tables below shows all the properties that can be used as a matchers in the firewall rules.

Matchers are executed in a specific order.

For IPv4:

    Source MAC Address
    In/Out interfaces
    In/Out interface lists
    IP Range
    Address type
    Address list
    TTL
    DSCP
    Length
    TLS
    IPv4 Options
    Dst Port
    Src Port
    Any Port
    TCP Options
    TCP MSS
    ICMP Codes
    Ingress Priority
    Priority
    Packet Mark
    Realm (routing table)
    Hotsopot
    Connection Mark
    Connection State
    Connection NAT State
    Connection Bytes
    Connection Limit
    Connection Rate
    Ipsec Policy
    Helper
    String (content)
    PSD
    Layer7
    Random
    Nth
    PCC
    Limit
    Dst Limit
    Log

For IPv6:

    Address type
    Address list
    Source MAC Address
    In/Out interfaces
    In/Out interface lists
    Hop Limit
    DSCP
    Length
    TLS
    IPv6 Header
    Dst Port
    Src Port
    Any Port
    TCP Options
    TCP MSS
    ICMPv6 Codes
    Ingress Priority
    Priority
    Packet Mark
    Connection Mark
    Connection State
    Connection NAT State
    Connection Bytes
    Connection Limit
    Connection Rate
    Ipsec Policy
    Helper
    Match String (content)
    Random
    Nth
    PCC
    Limit
    Dst Limit
    Log

 

Properties are split in two parts:

    stateless - properties do not require connection tracking to function and can be used in stateless RAW firewall matching.
    stateful - properties either require connection tracking to function or is available only in stateful firewall config.

Stateless Properties


chain (name; Default: )	Specifies to which chain rule will be added. If the input does not match the name of an already defined chain, a new chain will be created
comment (string; Default: )	Descriptive comment for the rule
content (string; Default: )	Match packets that contain specified text
dscp (integer: 0..63; Default: )	Matches DSCP IP header field.
dst-address (IP/netmask | IP range; Default: )	Matches packets whose destination is equal to the specified IP or falls into the specified IP range.
dst-address-list (name; Default: )	

Matches the destination address of a packet against a user-defined address-list.

Supports only one list!
dst-address-type (unicast | local | broadcast | multicast )	Matches destination address type:

    unicast - IP address used for point to point transmission
    local - if dst-address is assigned to one of the router's interfaces
    broadcast - packet is sent to all devices in a subnet
    multicast - packet is forwarded to a defined group of devices

dst-limit (integer[/time],integer,dst-address | dst-port | src-address[/time]; Default: )	Matches packets until a given rate is exceeded. Rate is defined as packets per time interval. As opposed to the limit matcher, every flow has its own limit. Flow is defined by a mode parameter. Parameters are written in the following format: rate[/time],burst,mode[/expire].

    rate - packet count per time interval per-flow to match
    time - specifies the time interval in which the packet count rate per flow cannot be exceeded (optional, 1s will be used if not specified)
    burst - initial number of packets per flow to match: this number gets recharged by one every time/rate, up to this number
    mode - this parameter specifies what unique fields define flow (src-address, dst-address, src-and-dst-address, dst-address-and-port, addresses-and-dst-port)
    expire - specifies interval after which flow with no packets will be allowed to be deleted (optional)

dst-port (integer[-integer]: 0..65535; Default: )	List of destination port numbers or port number ranges
fragment (yes|no; Default: )	

Matches fragmented packets. The first (starting) fragment does not count. If connection tracking is enabled there will be no fragments as the system automatically assembles every packet.

IPv4 only.

header (Type[:Mode]; Mode=contains|exact; Type=hop|dst|route|frag|ah|esp|none|proto)
	

Matches IPv6 next-header.

Two types of header matching are possible controlled by "mode" parameter:

    contains - soft matching, matches at least selected headers
    exact - matches exact set of selected headers

IPv6 only.

hop-limit (Mode:Value; Mode=equal | greater-than | less-than | not-equal; Value=0..255)
	

Matches hop limit field in the IPv6 header. 

IPv6 only.
hotspot (auth | from-client | http | local-dst | to-client; Default: )	Matches packets received from HotSpot clients against various HotSpot matchers.

    auth - matches authenticated HotSpot client packets
    from-client - matches packets that are coming from the HotSpot client
    http - matches HTTP requests sent to the HotSpot server
    local-dst - matches packets that are destined to the HotSpot server
    to-client - matches packets that are sent to the HotSpot client

IPv4 Only.
icmp-options (integer:integer; Default: )	Matches ICMP type: code fields
in-bridge-port (name; Default: )	Actual interface the packet has entered the router if the incoming interface is a bridge. Works only if use-ip-firewall is enabled in bridge settings.
in-bridge-port-list (name; Default: )	Set of interfaces defined in interface list. Works the same as in-bridge-port
in-interface (name; Default: )	Interface the packet has entered the router
in-interface-list (name; Default: )	Set of interfaces defined in interface list. Works the same as in-interface
ingress-priority (integer: 0..63; Default: )	Matches the priority of an ingress packet. Priority may be derived from VLAN, WMM, DSCP, or MPLS EXP bit. read more
ipsec-policy (in | out, ipsec | none; Default: )	Matches the policy used by IPsec. Value is written in the following format: direction, policy. The direction is Used to select whether to match the policy used for decapsulation or the policy that will be used for encapsulation.

    in - valid in the PREROUTING, INPUT, and FORWARD chains
    out - valid in the POSTROUTING, OUTPUT, and FORWARD chains

    ipsec - matches if the packet is subject to IPsec processing;
    none - matches packets that are not subject to IPsec processing (for example, IPSec transport packet).

For example, if a router receives an IPsec encapsulated Gre packet, then rule ipsec-policy=in,ipsec will match Gre packet, but a rule ipsec-policy=in,none will match the ESP packet.
ipv4-options (any | loose-source-routing | no-record-route | no-router-alert | no-source-routing | no-timestamp | none | record-route | router-alert | strict-source-routing | timestamp; Default: )	Matches IPv4 header options.

    any - match packet with at least one of the ipv4 options
    loose-source-routing - match packets with a loose source routing option. This option is used to route the internet datagram based on information supplied by the source
    no-record-route - match packets with no record route option. This option is used to route the internet datagram based on information supplied by the source
    no-router-alert - match packets with no router alter option
    no-source-routing - match packets with no source routing option
    no-timestamp - match packets with no timestamp option
    record-route - match packets with record route option
    router-alert - match packets with router alter option
    strict-source-routing - match packets with a strict source routing option
    timestamp - match packets with a timestamp

IPv4 only.
limit (integer,time,integer; Default: )	Matches packets up to a limited rate (packet rate or bit rate). A rule using this matcher will match until this limit is reached. Parameters are written in the following format: rate[/time],burst:mode.

    rate - packet or bit count per time interval to match
    time - specifies the time interval in which the packet or bit rate cannot be exceeded (optional, 1s will be used if not specified)
    burst - initial number of packets or bits to match: this number gets recharged every 10ms so burst should be at least 1/100 of a rate per second
    mode - packet or bit mode

nth (integer,integer; Default: )	Matches every nth packet: nth=2,1 rule will match every first packet of 2, hence, 50% of all the traffic that is matched by the rule
out-bridge-port (name; Default: )	Actual interface the packet leaves the router if the outgoing interface is a bridge. Works only if use-ip-firewall is enabled in bridge settings.
out-bridge-port-list (name; Default: )	Set of interfaces defined in interface list. Works the same as out-bridge-port
out-interface (; Default: )	Interface the packet is leaving the router
out-interface-list (name; Default: )	Set of interfaces defined in interface list. Works the same as out-interface
packet-mark (no-mark | string; Default: )	Matches packets marked via mangle facility with particular packet mark. If no-mark is set, the rule will match any unmarked packet. 
packet-size (integer[-integer]:0..65535; Default: )	Matches packets of specified size or size range in bytes.
per-connection-classifier (ValuesToHash:Denominator/Remainder; Default: )	

PCC matcher ( or Per Stream Classifier) allows dividing traffic into equal streams with the ability to keep packets with a specific set of options in one particular stream.

Streams are hashed based on selected values to hash:

    both-addresses    
    both-addresses-and-ports    
    both-ports    
    dst-address    
    dst-address-and-port    
    dst-port    
    src-address    
    src-address-and-port    
    src-port 

 Read more >>
port (integer[-integer]: 0..65535; Default: )	Matches if any (source or destination) port matches the specified list of ports or port ranges. Applicable only if protocol is TCP or UDP
priority (integer: 0..63; Default:)	Matches the packet's priority after a new priority has been set. Priority may be derived from VLAN, WMM, DSCP, MPLS EXP bit, or from the priority that has been set using the set-priority action. Read more
protocol (name or protocol ID; Default: tcp)	Matches particular IP protocol specified by protocol name or number
psd (integer,time,integer,integer; Default: )	Attempts to detect TCP and UDP scans. Parameters are in the following format WeightThreshold, DelayThreshold, LowPortWeight, HighPortWeight

    WeightThreshold - total weight of the latest TCP/UDP packets with different destination ports coming from the same host to be treated as port scan sequence
    DelayThreshold - delay for the packets with different destination ports coming from the same host to be treated as possible port scan subsequence
    LowPortWeight - the weight of the packets with privileged (<1024) destination port
    HighPortWeight - the weight of the packet with a non-privileged destination port

IPv4 only.
random (integer: 1..99; Default: )	Matches packets randomly with a given probability
src-address (Ip/Netmask, Ip range; Default: )	Matches packets whose source is equal to a specified IP or falls into a specified IP range
src-address-list (name; Default: )	

Matches the source address of a packet against a user-defined address list.

Supports only one list!
src-address-type (unicast | local | broadcast | multicast | blackhole | prohibit | unreachable ; Default: )	

mote{ta{tableMatches source address type:

    unicast - IP address used for point to point transmission
    local - if an address is assigned to one of the router's interfaces
    broadcast - packet is sent to all devices in the subnet
    multicast - packet is forwarded to a defined group of devices

src-port (integer[-integer]: 0..65535; Default: )	List of source ports and ranges of source ports. Applicable only if a protocol is TCP or UDP
src-mac-address (MAC address; Default: )	Matches the source MAC address of the packet
tcp-flags (ack | cwr | ece | fin | psh | rst | syn | urg; Default: )	Matches specified TCP flags

    ack - acknowledging data
    cwr - congestion window reduced
    ece - ECN-echo flag (explicit congestion notification)
    fin - close connection
    psh - push function
    rst - drop connection
    syn - new connection
    urg - urgent data

tcp-mss (integer[-integer]: 0..65535; Default: )	Matches TCP MSS value of an IP packet
time (time-time,sat | fri | thu | wed | tue | mon | sun; Default: )	Allows to create a filter based on the packets' arrival time and date or, for locally generated packets, departure time and date
tls-host (string; Default: )	Allows matching HTTPS traffic based on TLS SNI hostname. Accepts GLOB syntax for wildcard matching. Note that the matcher will not be able to match the hostname if the TLS handshake frame is fragmented into multiple TCP segments (packets).

Watch our video about this value. 
ttl (integer: 0..255; Default: )	Matches packets TTL value. IPv4 Only.
Stateful Properties


connection-bytes (integer-integer; Default: )	

Matches packets only if a given amount of bytes has been transferred through the particular connection.

0 - means infinity, for example connection-bytes=2000000-0 means that the rule matches if more than 2MB has been transferred through the relevant connection
connection-limit (integer,netmask; Default: )	Matches connections per address or address block after a given value is reached. Should be used together with connection-state=new and/or with tcp-flags=syn because matcher is very resource-intensive
connection-mark (no-mark | string; Default: )	Matches packets marked via mangle facility with particular connection mark. If no-mark is set, the rule will match any unmarked connection
connection-nat-state (srcnat | dstnat; Default: )	Can match connections that are srcnatted, distracted, or both. Note that connection-state=related connections connection-nat-state is determined by the direction of the first packet. and if connection tracking needs to use dst-nat to deliver this connection to the same hosts as the main connection it will be in connection-nat-state=dstnat even if there are no dst-nat rules at all
connection-rate (Integer 0..4294967295; Default: )	Connection Rate is a firewall matcher that allows capturing traffic based on the present speed of the connection
connection-state (established | invalid | new | related | untracked; Default: )	Interprets the connection tracking analytics data for a particular packet:

    established - a packet that belongs to an existing connection
    invalid - a packet that does not have a determined state in connection tracking (usually - severe out-of-order packets, packets with wrong sequence/ack number, or in case of a resource over usage on the router), for this reason, an invalid packet will not participate in NAT (as only connection-state=new packets do), and will still contain original source IP address when routed. We strongly suggest dropping all connection-state=invalid packets in the firewall filter forward and input chains
    new - the packet has started a new connection or is otherwise associated with a connection that has not seen packets in both directions.
    related - a packet that is related to, but not parts of an existing connection, such as ICMP errors or a packet that begins an FTP data connection
    untracked - packet that was set to bypass connection tracking in firewall RAW tables.

connection-type (ftp | h323 | irc | pptp | quake3 | sip | tftp; Default: )	Matches packets from related connections based on information from their connection tracking helpers. A relevant connection helper must be enabled under the: /ip firewall service-port
layer7-protocol (name; Default: )	Layer7 filter name defined in layer7 protocol menu. Read more>>.

p2p ()
	

Matches some unencrypted P2P protocols. Deprecated in modern days since mostly everything is encrypted and requires deep packet inspection to identify.

IPv4 only.
realm (integer: 0..4294967295; Default: )	IPv4 only.
routing-mark (string; Default: )	Matches packets marked by mangle facility with particular routing mark