

    Creado por Māris B., actualizado por última vez el feb 24, 2025 2 min de lectura

    Summary
    General
    Interface
    Neighbor
    Keys

Summary

MikroTik RouterOS implements RIP version 2 (RFC 2453). Version 1 (RFC 1058) is not supported.

RIP enables routers in an autonomous system to exchange routing information. It always uses the best path (the path with the fewest number of hops (i.e. routers)) available.


General

Sub-menu: /routing rip instance


name 	name of the instance
vrf ( Default: main)	which VRF to use
afi (ipv4 | ipv6; Default: )	specifies which afi to use.
in-filter-chain (Default: )	input filter chain
out-filter-chain (Default: )	output filter chain
out-filter-select (Default: )	output filter select rule chain
redistribute (bgp, bgp-mpls-vpn, connected, dhcp, fantasy, modem, ospf, rip, static, vpn; Default: )	which routes to redistribute
originate-default ( Default:)	whether to originate default route
routing-table ( Default: main)	in which routing table the routes will be added
route-timeout (Default: )	route timeout
route-gc-timeout  (Default: )	
update-interval (time; Default: )	specifies time interval after which the route is considered invalid


Note: The maximum metric of RIP route is 15. Metric higher than 15 is considered 'infinity' and routes with such metric are considered unreachable. Thus RIP cannot be used on networks with more than 15 hops between any two routers, and using redistribute metrics larger that 1 further reduces this maximum hop count.



Interface

Sub-menu: /routing rip interface-template


name 	name of the instance
instance	which VRF to use
interfaces 	specifies which afi to use.
source-addresses 	input filter chain
cost (Default: )	output filter chain
split-horizon (no| yes )	
poison-reverse (no| yes )	
mode (passive| strict)	
key-chain (name)	Name of key-chain which contains MD5 key. Should be set only when MD5 authentication is needed. 
password 	Password for plain text authentication. Should be set only when plain-text authentication is needed.



Sub-menu: /routing rip interface

Read-only properties:
instance (name)	name of the instance
address (address%interface )	IP address and interface name


Neighbor

Sub-menu: /routing rip neighbor


This submenu is used to define a neighboring routers to exchange routing information with. Normally there is no need to add the neighbors, if multicasting is working properly within the network. If there are problems with exchanging routing information, neighbor routers can be added to the list. It will force the router to exchange the routing information with the neighbor using regular unicast packets.


Read-only properties:
address (IP address)	IP address of neighboring router
routes	amount of routes
packets-total	amount of all packets
packets-bad	amount of bad packets
entries-bad	amount of bad entries
last-update (time)	time from last update


Sub-menu: /routing rip static-neighbor
instance (name)	name of used instance
address (IP address)	IP address of neighboring router
Keys

Sub-menu: /routing rip keys


MD5 authentication key chains.


chain (string; Default: "")	chain name to place this key in. 
key (string; Default: "")	authentication key. Maximal length 16 characters
key-id (integer:0..255; Default: )	key identifier. This number is included in MD5 authenticated RIP messages, and determines witch key to use to check authentication for a specific message.
valid-from (date and time; Default: today's date and time: 00:00:00)	key is valid from this date and time
valid-till (date and time; Default: today's date and time: 00:00:00)	key is valid until this date and time